---
header-includes:
- \usepackage{setspace}
- \doublespacing
---

# GEO 308 Guest Lecture 2: Dr. Jessica Creveling

## Robert Detjens

Usually people think of Earth being in one of two general states with regard to the amount of ice: with polar ice, and
without polar ice. However, there is a third state -- commonly called Snowball Earth. This ocurred prior to the
Cambrian Explosion, around 720 to 630 million years ago during the Cryogenian Period.

Looking at sediment deposits from this era, there are many irregularities. There are many large rocks deposited in the
finer layers of sediment. This is somewhat odd, since the fine layers can only deposit in areas with low energy, but
the large rocks need a lot of energy to be moved around. Sediment layers are deposited horizontally; this is called
Steno's Law of Original Horizontality. Layers around these foreign rocks buckle under it, and layers above are draped
over it. These foreign rocks are called ice-rafted debris. The large rocks were originally carried by glaciers, and
were transferred into icebergs at the end of the glacier. These icebergs eventually release the rocks inside them as
they melt, and the rocks fall to the seafloor, disturbing the existing sediments. New sediments are deposited on top of
the rock, creating the odd layering. These deposits are no different from modern ice-rafted debris, except for the
locations in which they were found. Deposits from the time of snowball Earth are found on all continents except
Antarctica. Since the angle of inclination of Earth's magnetic field changes depending on latitude, scientists can use
this to determine what latitude a rock was formed at. Lava flows from during snowball Earth have a range of angles,
showing that they were formed across a wide range of latitudes -- mostly -60* to 60*, as this is where the
supercontinent of the time (Rodinia) was.

To enter the snowball Earth state, there needs to be less CO2 in the atmosphere. A likely theory to how this was
achieved was silicate weathering, where acidic rain brings calcium ions to the sea and removing carbon from the ocean.
The speed of this weathering is dependent on several factors, including the temperature and precipitation. Rodina,
being on the equator, has both of these factors; the equator is hot and has lots of rainfall. Rapid silicate weathering
would then trap a large amount of CO2 into the ocean floor. Today, high-latitude continents get covered with ice which
slows weathering, providing negative feedback. If no continents are at high latitudes, as was the case with Rodinia,
sea ice forms as the planet cools. The equatorial continents continue to weather and trap more co2, creating positive
feedback (in this case, ice albedo feedback).

However, snowball Earth is self-terminating. Rainfall and silicate weathering stops once the planet is covered in ice,
slowing and stopping the trapping of CO2. Volcanoes are the only way that carbon is reintroduced into the atmosphere,
and once enough carbon is present, all the ice melts.
