---
header-includes:
- \usepackage{setspace}
- \doublespacing
fontsize: 11pt

title: Rare Earth Metals and the Hidden Cost of Renewable Energy
date: "12 March 2021"
author: Robert Detjens

bibliography: term-paper.bib
csl: apa.csl
---

$\vspace{\fill}$

# Introduction

Electric vehicles and renewable energy are commonly thought of as the future of technology and wholly
ecologically-friendly. However, there are still many environmentally-damaging processes that uphold the manufacturing
processes for these technologies. While true that the operation of these products can be "greener" than conventional
fossil-fuel vehicles, the manufacturing backbone for creating these products is still environmentally damaging. This
paper will explore the true environmental cost of producing clean energy products with a focus on electric vehicles and
rare earth metals.

$\vspace{\fill}$

$\pagebreak$

## Why are rare earth metals used in electric vehicles?

Rare earth metals are a group of 17 metals with unique properties. While these metals are not produced in a large
volume, they provide "critical functionality" to renewable energy technologies such as wind turbines and electric
vehicles. In particular, dysprosium (Dy) and neodymium (Nd) are used heavily in magnets. [@Alonso2012]

Normal fossil-fuel based vehicles require very small amounts of rare earth metals in their components. However, hybrid
and fully-electric vehicles require significantly larger amounts; namely in the battery pack and electric motors. A
Toyota Prius's nickel-metal hydride battery can contain upwards of 2.5 kilograms of rare earth metals. [@Silvestri2021].
The electric traction motor designs used in these vehicles use Neodymium-Iron-Boron (NdFeB) magnets, being more compact
and power-dense than alternatives. Dysprosium is added to the magnet to increase the heat tolerance to above 100^o^C. In
a 80 kW electric motor, one made with NdFeB magnets would be 20% smaller and use at least 300 watts less power than one
made with electromagnets [@Widmer2015].

## Environmental impacts of rare earth mining

There are four types of rare earth ores: monazite, bastnasite, xenotime and ionic clays. Ionic clays are the easiest to
mine and extract metals from, especially for "heavy" rare earths. The only major ionic clay deposits are in China
[@Packey2016].

While there are "white" mine running above-board and fully regulated by the Chinese government, there are many "gray"
and "black" mines operating illegally. Projections of the scale of these illegal mines re estimated at around 40,000T
per year, or 40% of China's annual REE output [@Packey2016].

There are two methods of mining ionic clays: surface hill top mining and in-situ leaching.

Surface mining involves extracting the ionic clays from the ground and then performing tank or heap leaching. According
to @Packey2016, the production of one ton of rare earth oxide requires of 300m^2 of earth, creates 2000T of tailings and
1000T of contaminated wastewater. Estimates of environment reclamation costs of surface mining in the the Ganzhou region
of China are at 38 billion RMB, compared to a total sales income of 32.9 billion RMB. Damages include "severe erosion,
air pollution, biodiversity loss, and health problems" [@Packey2016].

In-situ leaching extracts a solution of rare earths without needing to remove the clays from the ground. A leaching
solution of 5% ammonium sulphate is applied to a deposit. The solution soaks into the clays and dissolves the rare
earths into a slurry. The slurry is then extracted from the holes and processed. In-situ leaching can cause soil
contamination, water contamination both above and below ground, mine collapses, and landslides [@Packey2016].

## What is being done to offset the impacts of using rare earth metals?

### Removing rare earths

While using rare earth metals for EVs has long been the standard, some manufacturers are starting to investigate using
alternatives that do not use rare earths.

Rare earth magnets are expensive, responsible for a majority of both the material cost (Figure 1) and environmental cost
(Figure 2) of a permanent magnet motor. Permanent magnet motors may also be less efficient as previously claimed. as
complex control strategies are needed to compensate for the permanent nature of the permanent magnets which can be a
loss of efficiency [@Silvestri2021]. Renault and Tesla are already using alternatives to permanent magnet motors,
including wound rotor and induction motors, that do not use rare earth magnets at all [@Widmer2015].

Additionally, rare earth metals are only used in nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries. Alternative battery
technologies, like lithium-ion (LiIon) are slowly starting to become more prevalent in electric vehicles. Toyota has
developed hybrids that are compatible with both NiMH and LiIon batteries, for example the 2018 Camry Hybrid. However,
most hybrids on the roads today are still using NiMH batteries [@Silvestri2021].

### Recycling existing rare earths

Recycling existing rare earth metals has also been considered, as rare earths can be extracted from old batteries and
reused. Current projections for battery collection and recycling percentage estimate the amount of rare earths able to
be reclaimed from spent batteries is around 60%. However, as demand for EVs and batteries to power them increases --
perhaps doubling from 2015 to 2030 -- the demand for rare earths will continue to increase accordingly. As the recycling
rate becomes higher and more vehicles transition away from batteries involving rare earths, it is projected that demand
will decrease and eventually go down (Figure 3) [@Silvestri2021]. New recycling techniques are also being developed,
achieving upwards of 90% reclamation. However, there needs to be recyclers implementing these techniques. There are few
large-scale recyclers willing to reclaim spent NiMH batteries.

$\vspace{\fill}$

# Conclusion

Electric vehicles may be the future of green transportation, but their current state still has a large environmental
impact due to the use of rare earth metals. The industry is slowly beginning to wean off of using rare earth metals in
favor of other technologies, but demand for rare earths will continue to be high for several years or decades. By
reclaiming rare earths from existing batteries and regulating illegal mines to reduce the environmental impact, electric
vehicles can be made cleaner and live up the the expectation of being truly green.

$\vspace{\fill}$

$\pagebreak$

# References

::: {#refs}
:::

$\vspace{\fill}$

# Figures

![Materials cost in a 30 kW traction motor for a motor with rare earth magnets (‘interior\
permanent magnet motor’) and two options without [@Widmer2015]](images/motor-with-without-ree.jpg)

![Lifecycle data for the production of the different materials used in electric motors [@Widmer2015]](
images/motor-ggas-emissions.jpg)

![Forecasted demand with different levels of reclamation of rare earths from recycling [@Silvestri2021]](
images/ree-demand-recycling.jpeg)
